This format for storing these data is not ideal for two reasons. Firstly, it is not efficient; the parent information is repeated over and over again. This repetition is also undesirable because it creates opportunities for errors and inconsistencies to creep in. Ideally, each individual piece of information would be stored exactly once; if more than one copy exists then it is possible for the copies to disagree. We will discuss this idea more in Section The other problem is not as obvious, but is arguably much more important. The fundamental structure of the flat file format means that each line of the file contains exactly one record or case in the data set. This works well when a data set only contains information about one type of object, or, put another way, when the data set itself has a flat structure. The data set of family members does not have a flat structure. There is information about two different types of object, parents and children, and these objects have a definite relationship between them. We can say that the data set is hierarchical or multi-level or stratified (as is obvious from the view of the data in Figure 7.4). Any data set that is obtained using a non-trivial study design is likely to have a hierarchical structure like this. In other words, a flat file format does not allow for sophisticated “data models” (see Section 7.9.5). A flat file is unable to provide an appropriate representation of a complex data structure.  Although not a formal standard, comma-separated value (CSV) files are very common and are a quite reliable plain text delimited format. For example, this is a common way to export data from a spreadsheet.

The main rules for the CSV format are:

    Each field is separated by a comma (i.e., the character `,' is the delimiter).
    Fields containing commas must be surrounded by double quotes (i.e., the `"' character is special).
    Fields containing double quotes must be surrounded by double quotes and each embedded double quote must be represented using two double quotes (i.e., `""' is an escape sequence for a literal double quote).
    There can be a single header line containing the names of the fields.

