 Another thing to consider is how the files will be ordered in directory listings; will it be easy to browse a list of the files in a directory and find the file we want?

When a file name contains a date, the best way to format that date is as a number, with year first, month second, and day last. This ensures that, when the files are alphabetically ordered, the files will be grouped sensibly. Figure 7.7 shows the surface temperature data at the Pacific Pole of Inaccessibility (see Section 1.1) in two different formats: the original plain text and an XML format.One fundamental similarity between these formats is that they are both just text. This is an important and beneficial property of XML; we can read it and manipulate it without any special skills or any specialized software. The XML format of the data consists of two parts: XML mark up and the actual data itself. For example, the information about the latitude at which these data were recorded is stored with XML tags, <latitude> and </latitude>, surrounding the latitude value. The combination of tags and content are together described as an XML element. This should look very familiar because these are exactly the same notions of elements and attributes that we saw in HTML documents (see Chapter 2). The tags in an XML document provide information about where the information is stored within the document. This is an advantage because it means that humans can find information within the file easily. That is true of any plain text file, but it is especially true of XML files because the tags essentially provide a level of documentation for the human reader. For example, a line like this .. ... not only makes it easy to determine that the value 48.8S constitutes a single data value within the file, but it also makes it clear that this value is a north-south geographic location.

The fact that an XML document is self-describing is also a huge advantage from the perspective of the computer. An XML document provides enough information for software to determine how to read the file, without any further human intervention. Looking again at the line containing latitude information ... 
